# There are no data types, only bits, widths and interpretations.

**Note1: Everything in this writeup is strictly in accord with the ISO C 9889:2024 (C23) draft, which is accessible at [open-std.org](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n3220.pdf)** .

**Note2: In the end, everything is a number in C, which is why there is no heading dedicated to characters or strings is used in this writeup. This is counterintuitive, but proved later in the writeup.**

---

Every programming language has data types.

A data type is a container with **width** as a property. The wider the container is, the larger the range of values it can hold.

As beginners, we are told that "an int is sized 4 bytes". Some tutorials might say that "the size of an int is implementation-defined".
  - None of the statements are completely right or wrong.
  - These statements are correct **with hidden clauses**, which we will uncover soon.

Although "size" is not a wrong name for the property of a data type, the ISO C uses "width". Therefore, we will use "width" in this writeup whenever we have to talk about the "size" of a data type.

---

For the machine, everything is an integer with a bit-pattern. It can't distinguish between a character, a digit, or an emoji. It is the interpretation of this bit-pattern that makes something a number, a character or anything else.

Format specifiers decide the interpretation of the value stored at a portion of memory.

Here is a complete list of data types in C. Remember, everything is an integer.

## Standard Integer Types

They include standard signed integer types and the corresponding standard unsigned integer types, with an exception of `bool` which is only an unsigned integer type.

### Standard Signed Integer Types

There are five standard signed integer types:
  1. signed char, 
  2. short int, 
  3. int, 
  4. long int, and
  5. long long int

| Data Type | Other Names | Format Specifier | Width guaranteed by the ISO C standard |
| :-------- | :---------- | :--------------- | :------------------------------------- |
| signed char |  | %c | >= 8 bits |
| short | short int, signed short, signed short int | %hi | >= 16 bits |
| int | signed, signed int | %i or %d | >= 16 bits |
| long | long int, signed long, signed long int | %ld or %li | >= 32 bits |
| long long | long long int, signed long long, signed long long int | %lld or %lli | >= 64 bits |

### Standard Unsigned Integer Types

| char | %c | >= 8 bits | | 256 | Implementation-defined |

For each of the signed integer types, there is a corresponding unsigned integer type.

| Data Type | Other Names | Format Specifier | Width guaranteed by the ISO C standard (in bits) |
| :-------- | :---------- | :--------------- | :----------------------------------------------- |
| bool |  | %d | exactly 1 bit | true and false | 2 | Unsigned, always. |
| unsigned char |  | %c | >= 8 bits | [0, (2^8)-1] | 256 | unsigned |
| unsigned short | unsigned short int | %hu | >= 16 bits | [0, (2^16)-1] | 65,536 | unsigned |
| unsigned int |  | %u | >= 16 bits | [0, (2^32)-1] | 4,294,967,296 | unsigned |
| unsigned long | unsigned long int | %lu | >= 32 bits | 4b: [-(2^31), (2^31)-1] | 4,294,967,296 | unsigned |
| unsigned long long | unsigned long long int | %llu | >= 64 bits | [-(2^64), (2^64)-1] | 18,446,744,073,709,551,616 | unsigned |

## Bit-Precise Integer Type

A _BitInt(N) is a bit-precise integer type, where N is an integer that specifies the number of bits that are used to represent the type.

It can be both signed and unsigned. `_BitInt(N)` alone is signed `unsigned _BitInt(N)` is unsigned.

## Extended Integer Types

These are the types that an implementation (the compiler) supports based on hardware availability. The standard doesn't define them, but acknowledges their existence.

For example, gcc/clang has __int128 on x64, which is 128-bit integer type.

They can be both signed and unsigned.

---

The standard signed integer types, bit-precise signed integer types, and extended signed integer types are collectively called **signed integer types**.

The standard unsigned integer types, bit-precise unsigned integer types, and extended unsigned integer types are collectively called **unsigned integer types**.

## The Two Questions

**Ques1**: Why the tables above lack the standalone `char` data type?

**Ques2**: Why we are talking in terms of "minimum width" when every architecture has a specific width?

### The absence of `char`

Normally, we use the standalone `char` data type. It is absent in the tables because it is implementation-defined.

The ISO C draft 9889:2024 (C23) defines it in a way which makes it hard to fit in any of the tables above.

On page 38, under section 6.2.5, paragraph #3 is written as followed:
```
An object declared as type char is large enough to store any member of the basic execution character set. If a member of the basic execution character set is stored in a char object, its value is guaranteed to be nonnegative. If any other character is stored in a char object, the resulting value is implementation-defined but shall be within the range of values that can be represented in that type.
```

On page 19, under section 5.2.1, we have the paragraphs defining the character sets. Here are those paragraphs clarified.

-> **Paragraph #1**

We have two characters sets:
  1. Source character set: the character set in which source files are written.
  2. Execution character set: the character set that ends up in the execution environment.

**Note: Mostly they are map one-to-one, but they are not guaranteed to be identical in some cases.**

-> **Paragraph #2**

A byte with all bits set to 0, called the null character, shall exist in the basic execution character set; it is used to terminate a character string.

-> **Paragraph #3**

Both the basic source and basic execution character sets have the following characters:
  - The 26 uppercase letters of the Latin alphabet.
  - The 26 lowercase letters of the Latin alphabet.
  - The 10 digits of the decimal system, i.e [0, 9].
  - The 32 graphic/special characters as in ASCII (only the printable ones).
  - The space character and the control characters (horizontal tab, vertical tab, and form feed).


## Standard Floating-Point Types

| Data Type | Format Specifier | Width guaranteed by the ISO C standard (in bits) | Range of Values | Total Addressable Values (2^n_bits) | Signedness |
| :-------- | :--------------- | :----------------------------------------------- | :-------------- | ----------------------------------: | :--------- |
| float (Single precision) | %f | 4 byte | 4 byte | [-(2^31), (2^31)-1] | 4,294,967,296 | signed, always |
| double (Double precision) | %lf | 8 byte | 8 byte | [-(2^64), (2^64)-1] | 18,446,744,073,709,551,616 | signed, always |
| long double | %Lf | 12 byte | 16 byte |

float is a subset of double and double is a subset of long double.






everything is a number.

everything depends on the format specifier.

<limits.h>

hierarchy: bool < char < short < int < long < long long

float < double < long double

actual widths are implementation defined. (prove it by finding implementations where they are different, like char being 2)

There are five standard signed integer types, designated as signed char, short int, int, long int, and long long int.

**Note2: The range of possible values is calculated using these formulas, which are based on 2's complement,**
```bash
# Unsigned Range
[0, (2^n)-1]

# Signed Range
[-(2^(n-1)), (2^(n-1))-1] 

n is the number width of the type in bits.
```

